hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye I think almost all postmodernism
is a form of projection and so when they
suggest that all narratives are about
power dynamics I think what they are
saying is they wish to use their
narrative as a power Dynamic narrative
they understand is the thing that drives
human beings uh and so what they do is
they read their own willingness to drive
human beings via a narrative like victim
victimizer into every narrative so it
must be that every narrative is driven
by an underlying power substructure
because their narrative they believe is
driven by an underlying power
[Music]
substructure hello everybody I'm talking
today with Ben Shapiro Ben and I have
had occasion to speak privately and
publicly a number of times and he
participated in the Exodus seminar that
we released last year and we've been
able to deepen and extending extend the
U dimensions of our conversation as we
progressed today I'm going to talk to
him about the counter Enlightenment the
realization across many disciplines that
imperm and rationality are
insufficient processes and modes of
conceptualization to orient Us in the
world I think that's an established fact
now and it's a revolutionary fact means
that we see the world through a story
and so Ben and I are going to talk about
just exactly what that means not least
about the fact that the left in
particular the radical left has insisted
that the fundamental story that the
world should be viewed through and is
inevitably viewed through as one of
power that leads to the victim
victimizer Nar that characterized
characterized Marxism and that now so
bitterly characterizes whatever the hell
it is that we have in front of us now
this demented pasti of postmodernism and
a kind of metam Marxism that makes
everyone either a victim or a victimizer
we talk about that in detail and so if
you're interested in
that then this is the talk for
you so happy New Year beny to see you
yeah great to see you hey so I thought
we would um avoid the political at least
to some degree for the majority of this
conversation I actually have some ideas
I want to talk to you about and so um
I'm going to run them by you and then
I'm and I want your reactions obviously
so here's the first thing I've been
thinking about so I'm writing this new
book called we who wrestle with God and
one of its presumptions is that I
suppose this is something I just talked
about with John verv too we've been
conceptualizing it I suppose as a
counter Enlightenment so here's what I
think's going on at the deepest
level so the enlightenment was
predicated on the idea that we could
Orient ourselves in the world either
empirically as a matter of course with
regards to the data at hand or
rationally using a prior structures of
logic or as a combination of both
but that turns out to be wrong which is
what the postmodernists figured out and
it wasn't just the postmodernists the AI
Engineers figured it out at the same
time the cognitive scientists the
affective neuroscientists people who are
studying
narrative the fundamental problem with
the empirical and rational hypotheses
start with empirical is that we can't
Orient ourselves by the data alone
because there's an infinite plethora of
data and there's no way of wending our
way through the data without
prioritizing it in terms of importance
and that can't be
done using empiricism per se or even
rationally because you have to specify a
goal you have to bring in the domain of
values now my hypothesis is at the
moment working hypothesis is
that the structure that we use to
prioritize the facts so that we can
navigate forward is when described a
story a story is a representation of a
hierarchy of attentional priority now
the reason this is revolutionary I think
is because it puts the story back at the
center of the
stage okay so the I'd like your comments
about that first and then I'll turn to
the next part of this I mean I I think
that that's totally true when you say
that you have to have some sort of
values frame to determine exactly how
you view the data that's that's
obviously true because as you say
there's an entire ocean of data out
there and how you prioritize which data
is more important is dependent on on how
you value that data that's true you know
in everything from abortion to you know
the trolley problem any anytime you you
get into some sort of dilemma about what
human beings should do the should is a
question of values and you can have as
many facts as you want on the
utilitarian after effects of that but
even the questions of U utilitarianism
are dependent on questions of values at
the end and that that's why
utilitarianism as a sort of Standalone
philosophy tends to fail and when you
say that the the the fill in there is
story because story is a representation
of values in an easily understandable
way that that that is absolutely true I
mean the fact is that what a story is is
by nature something that is being told
to you and there's something deeply
human about that when When someone tells
you a story you don't tend to question
the story in the way a journalist would
question a story when someone says I'm
going to tell you a story now you listen
all the way through to the story with
Reliance on the Storyteller and that
innately is an act of faith and so when
you do that what you're really saying is
that I'm assuming the set of values for
the sake of this story I'm assuming the
set of values that under GD and is
embedded in the story and then we can
operate from those premises and what
makes a story good or bad to to pretty
much everyone is our innate
understanding of the under underlying
coherence and values that are embedded
in the
story okay so so that touches on a
couple of other things that I think have
become much more clear recently too so I
was playing with chat GPT yesterday and
I have a employee used to be a student
who's an expert at large language models
now the way that large language models
work essentially is that they calculate
conditional probabilities and so you
could imagine that there's a pretty high
conditional probability that an S will
follow an e for example if you look at
how letters are segregated and a very
low probability that X will follow Zed
and so you can you can model words based
on the statistical likelihood of the
juxtoposition of letters and then you
can model word to word correspondences
and then word to phrase and phrase to
sentence and sentence to sentence and
paragraph to paragraph and the large
language model AI Learning Systems
derive a p a picture of the statistical
relationship between words at pretty
much every level of stat a possible
statistical relationship so it's not
just word to word like the old Markov
Chains It's word to Fourth word and word
to fifth word and word to 10th word and
and we we we actually have no idea how
deep the models go the answer is they go
deep enough so that the output that they
produce is sufficiently
indistinguishable from Human output so
that we find it acceptable as such
that's really the criteria but this is
very cool Ben because when I talk to Sam
Harris one of the things he said to me
repeatedly and he said such things to
other people is that our interpretations
of narratives are arbitrary so he kind
of goes postmodern on that front is that
if you if you're trying to interpret
biblical stories for example all you're
doing is reading into them right it's a
projection that the story as such has no
intrinsic meaning but I think that this
is not only wrong but now but now
demonstrated to be wrong because what
the ailm systems can do is map out the
relationship between words and Concepts
statistically so now we have an
empirical validation for the Freudian or
yian notion of symbol so yesterday for
example one of the things that I've
noted in stories you see this in Disney
movies for example is that a character
like a witch which is a from a union
perspective a symbol of the negative
feminine that' be associated with nature
and chaos and the unknown and darkness
and fecundity and like there's a web of
associated ideas and you might say well
those associations are just arbitrary
but now we can say well no they're not
because if you look into the entire
linguistic Corpus you can map out the
semantic different distance between
Concepts and that means that there's
going to be clusters of Concepts and a
cluster of Concepts is no different than
an archetype or a symbol and so now we
have at at hand the possibility of an
empirical mapping of such things and
we've been playing with these systems so
we've designed systems for example that
can interpret dreams so you can type in
your dream and the system will tell you
what it means you might say well that
interpretation is just arbitrary and I
would say that's it's not arbitrary at
all every in a dream exists within a
framework of meaning the meaning is
something
like SE is something like statistical
distance from a web of associated
meanings if you fles out that web of
associated meanings that's no different
than delving more deeply into the
substructure of the dream that's no
different than a formal analysis of a
text you know that a real literary
critic whose mind has been shaped in
some ways the same way that an llm model
has been shaped would would so someone
with a great Corpus of literary
knowledge is going to be able to perform
the same kind of analysis as an llm and
none of that's arbitrary okay so the
reason I'm pointing to all this is
twofold so you tell me what you think
about this so let's say that we've
reached a kind of revolutionary
agreement that the story is primary so
there's an implicit framework of value
weights through which you look at the
world that constitutes your character
and your ethical pres presuppositions if
I told a story about how that if I gave
an account of how that M pattern made
itself manifest in the real world that
would be a story and I can infer from
the story what your weights are and I
can use them to adjust
mine okay so so let's say that all seems
appropriate and I don't think it's just
appropriate I think this is been
absolutely demonstrated in multiple
disciplines simultaneously in the last
30 years and that it's culminated in the
large language
model um demonstration which is an
unbelievably compelling demonstration
okay so let's say now we've agreed that
the story is primary now the that's what
the postmodernists basically concluded
in the 1960s but here's what they
did they said the story's primary
then which was a great observation and a
brilliant deduction but then they said
and the primary story
is victim
victimizer right and that's a that's a
strange Twist on the Marxism that most
of them were already encapsulated in now
I've been criticized for my views on
postmodernism my assumption that it's a
form of Marxism and so here's what I
think Marxism and postmodernism share
and here's how I think they're different
and this is a good thing for
conservatives to know he because so they
they share the victim victimizer
narrative and that in itself isn't
Marxist that's a variant of the story of
Cain and Abel it's an
ancient it's the ancient way of viewing
the world through the lens of resentment
and Marxism was a variant of that now
the postmodernists dispensed with
Marxism and they did that partly because
people like Soul niten show
how brutal and catastrophic by necessity
Marxism became now all those French
postmodernists they were steeped in
marxis Marxism they didn't want to give
it up so they kept the victim victimizer
narrative and they turned it into
something
multi-dimensional right that would be
the intersectional postmodernism where
you can be a victim or a victimizer on
any dimension of comparison and all of
them simultaneously so it's like a metam
Marxism it's like it's like the full
flowering of bitter resentment but
here's a here's the difference and this
is so stunning it it just hit me hard
this week the marxists insisted that the
primary dimension of victim victimizer
and and really the only one worth
considering given their Universal human
Vision was
economic and the Bloody postmodernists
put that at the bottom of the
intersectional hierarchy so and weirdly
although they accepted and propagated
the victim victimizer narrative they
inverted the hierarchy so that see you
can think about someone like Claudine
gay like there's no way you can make the
case that Claudine gay was oppressed
economically in fact economically coming
from a rich family as she did she's
clearly a victimizer but that doesn't
count because for
some incomprehensible reason maybe and
this is where I would like particularly
like your comments
the
postmodern victim victimizer types they
abandoned the economic issue that's why
like poor white people can't be
oppressed even though like I think the
most compelling case you can make for
the victim victimizer narrative is on
the grounds of economic inequality now
I'm not saying you can make an
overwhelmingly powerful case for it even
there but if you were going to make a
case that would be you got to give markx
credit for at least identifying that as
perhaps the Cardinal dimension of
potentially tragic inequality so okay so
so what do you think about that the
prioritization of Marxism as or the
victim victimizer narrative as the
Cardinal orienting story of mankind and
then this weird inversion of Marxism
that characterizes the radicals that we
see today I mean I certainly think that
there's a lot of support for that idea
right there are a lot of philosophers
who for example have treated Marxism not
as an outgrowth of a capitalist economic
theory but actually as as a sort of
perverse and twisted outgrowth of a
misre of Christianity that that
Christianity suggesting that the meek
will inherit the Earth but the but on an
economic level me aren't inheriting the
Earth therefore there must be some form
of class exploitation that's going on
and so reading Marxism as a weird
offshoot of Christianity rather than a
weird offshoot of capitalism is sort of
one way of of seeing that in a misot of
Christianity nii actually did some of
this right nii actually sort of
suggested this when he when he treated
Christianity as a perverse version of a
victimizer victim narrative that
replaced the idea of good strong and
beautiful and weak nasty and terrible
right that his his moral prism was the
idea that just because something is good
and strong doesn't mean that it's
necessarily bad and he was creating a
what I think is a perverse view of
Christianity as arguing against that and
then creating a victim victimizer
narrative in opposition to that uh when
when you talk about the postmodernist I
think one of the things the
postmodernists are doing is I I think
almost all postmodernism is a form of
projection and so when they suggest that
all narratives are about power dynamics
I think what they are saying is they
wish to use their narrative as a power
Dynamic narrative they understand is the
thing that drives human beings uh and so
what they do is they read their own
willingness to drive human beings via a
narrative like victim victimizer into
every narrative so it must be that every
narrative is driven by an underlying
power substructure because their
narrative they believe is driven by an
underlying power substructure and I
think obviously that's wrong and again I
think that that that also comes from a a
postmodernism again is sort of a weird
perverse offshoot of the Enlightenment
in the sense that if you're talking
about an a prior a priori view of the
world which is that everything that you
have arrived at in
society everything that pre-exists to
you is effectively arbitrary or a
version of cram down power that there's
no validity to the world that you
inherit which is I think one of the the
premises of some of the changes that
came about because of the Enlightenment
but also one of the premises of
postmodern ISM which is you get to wreck
all the systems because you were born
into an unfair system driven by perverse
views of power that's the great lie and
so postmodernism has to have its own
narrative I mean this of course is the
great kind of metap failing of
postmodernism is that in its desire to
destroy all narratives as forms of power
they have to derive their own narrative
in order to do that right postmodernism
is self-defeating on the very root
intellectual level but that doesn't mean
that it's not effective and again I I
think a lot of this
a lot the enlightenment the post enlight
a lot of this lies in frankly a perverse
misreading of biblical narratives so so
let me touch on that one okay so I just
wrote about the parable of the unjust
Steward now it's very interesting
Parable
so the story is about this employer
essentially and he has an employee a
servant but an employee for all in sense
intents and purposes and he he threatens
to fire him for misusing his funds and
the employee goes out to some of his
subcontractors and he offers them this
deal where if they pay off a certain
proportion of their debts immediately so
that he has some money so that he can
move forward uh in good faith apart from
this side deal with his employer then
everything will be set straight and so
he does that and he generates enough
Capital to satisfy his master now
there's a certain dishonesty in his
maneuverings but Christ says to his
followers that the children of Darkness
essentially are sometimes wiser than the
children of light and that there's some
utility in serving Mammon
properly as long as you don't prioritize
that over Services of what is to the
highest it's a very very
interesting Parable and
because as you mentioned there's a
reading of
Christianity
that has what you might
argue is like an
anti-materialist anti- capitalist
pro-socialist bent but I believe that a
close reading of the gospels puts that
interpretation completely off to the
side there is an emphasis that the those
who claim false power will be held to
account for that and that those who are
just and good but marginalized will be
brought to the center but that that has
nothing to do with an essential
Narrative of like fundamental oppression
it it's it's a much deeper idea than
that the true virtue will be rewarded
and false virtue punished even if the
false virtue is associated with material
Prosperity right that the truth will be
revealed
so Christ's point in that particular
Parable is that
the discipline that you can learn while
managing let's say money or managing
money for someone else managing material
Prosperity is a virtue that is first of
all genuinely a virtue and that can be a
precursor virtue to service to the
highest possible good which it should be
a subset of anyways and that it can't
just be tossed off casually as you know
all service to material prosper it or
life more abundant is because of its
materialism or its capitalism to be
regarded with extreme suspicion you know
and it's also not money that's regarded
it's not money that's regarded as the
primary sin in the gospels e there it's
love of money and that means the
prioritization of money over God it
doesn't mean the pursuit of life more
abundant you know this is also a place I
think where the Jewish tradition has got
things very right because my sense is
there's a laudable emphasis in the
Jewish tradition
on the goodness of a good life right the
material present physical goodness of a
good life and that is different than
that spiritualized reading of
Christianity that makes everything in
the material world like damned and
corrupt by by
definition yeah it's a very weird take
on on Christianity that Christianity is
all about vows of poverty I mean given
the development of the western world is
the richest civilization in the history
of the world is and driven largely by
religious Christians if you look at the
generation of American Wealth
particularly in the late 19th century
for example this is all religious men me
John J Rockefeller is attending church
and and dedicating churches I mean like
this is this kind of bizarre notion that
you know Christianity is in direct
conflict with capitalism or property
rights or anything like that that's
obviously it's obviously foolish and and
wrong but that's why I say I think that
that Marxism is a bastardization in many
ways of a misread of of the Bible and I
think that that so many of our problems
because let's be real about this the
Bible shaped the modern world and so
that means that even the perverse
offshoots of the Bible shap the modern
world and so even even the victim
victimizer narratives that we see in the
Bible many of them are deliberately or
or maybe not deliberately missing the
point you when people look at the Cain
versus Abel narrative and they say that
that what that story is actually about
for example is Cain being being you know
some he's vicious and he's and he treats
himself as a victim and Able's the
victimizer and therefore he kills he
kills Abel and therefore he's punished
the reality is what that story is about
is him recognizing the sin of that I
think that the K Nable story what's
fascinating about the C Nable story is
everybody misses the end of the Cain and
abble Story the very end of that story
is not just Cain going wandering in the
wilderness it's that he's the first
person in the Bible who actually does
repentance before God he says I've
sinned and then God marks him with The
Mark of Cain and The Mark of Cain is
meant to protect him right The Mark of
Cain is not meant to Mark him for murder
he says I'm going to wander I'm being
Outcast people are going to kill me and
God says I'm going to give you this Mark
specifically to protect you because
you've repented of the victim victimizer
sin America is currently experiencing an
invasion a lot of people coming in from
usbekistan Afghanistan Iraq Syria is
there a fa a gang affiliation among all
always these people are just crossing
the border illegally waving their hands
in the air at our cameras saying hey
here I am come get me we're no longer
the border patrol we're the welcome
patol the number one site in America for
fenel trafficking across the border and
if Joe Biden remains in office it's only
going to get worse I'm Ben Shapiro and
this is the divided states of Biden
Invasion on the southern border watch
now on dailywire
plus starting a business can be tough
especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the did we just hit a million
order stage Shopify is there to help you
grow our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions
Shopify helps you turn browsers into
buyers with the internet's best
converting checkout up to 36% better
compared to other leading Commerce
platforms no matter how big you want to
grow Shopify gives you everything you
need to take control and take your
business to the next level sign up for a
$1 per month trial period at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jbbp well and he also says you know he
says that the sin that he's committed is
more than he can bear and I believe the
reason for that it's very much gerain to
the current political situation too is
that if you associate success of any
sort with power oppression and
Corruption and we should say that when
success goes wrong by the way it does go
wrong in the direction of power right so
that power is a corrupting force and
there is a narrative of power it's just
it's not the fundamental narrative when
Cain tears down his ideal right because
his ideal is clearly able it's able he
wants to be and he wants the
relationship between abble and the
Divine to characterize his life and then
he destroys that completely in a fit of
absolute Spite and resentment and that's
when he goes to God and says that his
punishment is more than he can bear and
that's because if you do tear down the
ideal like if you identify success with
oppression then well all your success
instantly becomes nothing but evidence
of your evil well you can't imagine as a
psychologist understanding how reward
works I can't imagine a conceptual
scheme more devastating to the function
of the natural reward systems than to
associate
the attainment of a goal with what's
most
malevolent right there's nothing worse
you can do than that and you know to
give the devil is due so one of the
things I've been thinking F tell me what
you think about this I've been writing
about this with Jonathan pajo we wrote
an article for the Ark on this topic pel
walked me through one of the images in
the Book of Revelation and the Book of
Revelation you see the of Babylon
on the back of the Beast that represents
the state this mult multi-headed Beast
so the multi-headed Beast is sort of a
degenerate version of the unity of the
state it started
to deteriorate so now it sprouts
multiple heads right diversity heads you
might say right well and I mean that in
some real way because if the state isn't
unified it's fragmented and a fragmented
Beast has multiple heads and the heads
can fight so there's the demented State
on top of the demented State on its back
is the horror of Babylon and so the way
that we've read that is that when the
patriarchal structure deteriorates so
when masculinity itself becomes corrupt
the corruption of femininity accompanies
it and the the the destruction of
femininity is something like the
disinhibition of female sexuality it
maybe it's transformation into a
marketable commodity that's a good way
of thinking about it you can think about
that in terms of only fans and online
pornography and all of that that that
immediate
um or even the selling of women in
short-term relationships for sexual
purposes women can sell themselves just
like pimps can sell them and so so
there's this correspondence between the
Beast the patriarchal beast
destabilizing and then the feminine
destabilizing and of course it has to be
that way because one sex can't
destabilize without the other now what's
cool about this from a conceptual
perspective is that the Beast ends up
killing the
and so here's a reading of that is that
the power mad
state will draw you into its clutches
with the promises of unbridled
Hedonism right says like you give us the
power and we'll enable you to do
whatever you want right which means to
fall prey to your short-term hedonic
whims but then the consequence of that
of course is that the tyrannical State
once instantiated makes any pleasure of
any sort whatsoever
not only impossible but
forbidden and so and then one more thing
on top of that so imagine we're in a
situation
where God has died and so the thing that
United us has disintegrated so now we've
fallen into a state of disunion then you
might ask well what powers arise in the
aftermath of the dissolution of what's
unified and here's some answers the
goddess or God of nature
the god of
power the god of Hedonism so that would
be like motivational whims short-term
motivational whims and the god of
Despair right of nihilism so those would
be powerful uniting
stories that don't unite everything but
that that carry a substantive amount of
explanatory weight you know like Freud
for example his explan atory narrative
was sex which is an explanation
essentially of Hedonism and the
biologists like Richard Dawkins they
fall into that trap as well identifying
even the human impetus to propagate
across time with nothing more than the
reproductive urge fundamentally so
anyways imagine that there's a hierarchy
of God so to speak you lose the top
unifying God that's the death of God M
elad tracked that as a recur occurring
phenomenon in history by the way that
paralleled the disintegration of the
states upon which the the states that
were founded on that unifying Vision so
then it collapses into the next highest
unifying narratives certainly power is
one of those Hedonism is one of those
and then they have an alignment there's
another Twist on that too which is that
one of the reasons one of the things you
might ask yourself is why would you want
to pursue power and the answer would be
well so I can
compel other people to do things then
you might say well compel them to do
what and then the answer to that's got
to be something like well I want them to
do what I want them to do and so that
way power becomes the handmaiden of
Hedonism and I think we see that in the
modern radical leftist movements as well
because they are characterized by an
Unholy Union of absolute Ely Lous
Hedonism and in this insane insistence
that power rules everything and as you
pointed out that also justifies the use
of power I mean I I think that's also
the only promise that the left in this
context has been able to fulfill meaning
the the promise of tearing down the
existing systems was that it was going
to bring about human fulfillment a
Kinder Better World more accepting and
tolerant world and unbridled Hedonism
well it turns out that the last of those
is the only one that has actually been
fulfilled in the modern world and the
others are all lacking the others are
just not there because you actually need
intermediate social institutions built
from the ground up in order to actually
provide for human fulfillment or human
Unity or any of these other things but
what you can do is if you wreck all the
intermediate institutions and you turn
everybody into an atomized individual
you can certainly guarantee them the
pursuit of whatever hedonistic pleasure
is available but that's only for a time
I mean as you mentioned at a certain
point if there is to be any in Factor at
all the power is going to have to crush
that too because I mean and this is what
Orwell says in 1984 essentially is that
if the hedonic will exists in opposition
to other wills it cannot be a ronian
general will right there there can't
really be ronian General will to just
giant hedonic pleasure that eventually
those hedonic Pleasures come into
conflict with one each one another right
exactly exactly that's exactly why well
they're also very there's another reason
too so even technically speaking the
honic drives are primordial sex for
example or aggression and one of the
things that characterizes primordial
drives apart from their power and their
multiplicity which can put them in
Conflict as you said is their short-term
nature so one of the things Pou has
walked through with me is this is a very
smart idea too so imagine that the
unifying structure of the meta narrative
deteriorates and what you get emerging
are a variety of states of potential
Domination by hedonistic whims emotions
and motivations fundamentally now
they're very shortterm in their
orientation because they want what they
want in a single-minded way um that's
what a cyclops is by the way they want
what they want in a single-minded way
and they want it bloody well now and
they want it for the person in question
now the problem with that is that what I
want now for me is not the principle
upon which
any social relationship can be founded
right because if it's for me only now
which is by the way the identity claims
of the radical leftists right if it's
for me now it's certainly not for my
wife it's certainly not for my children
or my parents it's not for the broader
Community like there's no reciprocal
Altru there's no productive generous
reciprocal altruism in atomized
individualism and so then it can't then
it can't survive so one of the things we
are seeing talked to Louise Perry about
this too on the sexual Revolution front
is that even without government
suppression of sexuality let's say what
we're seeing is a widescale abandonment
of sexuality such that this is
particularly true in Japan and South
Korea I think it's 30% now of young
people in Japan and Korea under the ages
of 30 are virgins we see it now that
half of women in the west are unmarried
at 30
half of them won't have children and 90%
of them will regret it we see the
widescale turning to
pornography right and you could think
about that as the ultimate expression of
short-term hedonic gratification but we
see the consequence of that and the
consequence of that is inability to
perform sexually and the disruption of
actual relationships so I don't even
think we'd have to see the state itself
turn into a totalitarian beast and and
eradicate Hedonism I think that the
pursuit of short-term desire which is
also by the way what Psychopaths do
right like here's something cool I've
looked at the literature psychological
literature on this in depth recently so
the that that hedonistic mating strategy
of one night stand let's say that
absolutely characterizes
Psychopaths and so one of the Hallmarks
of the development of antisocial
Behavior among adolescence is early and
fre multipartner sexual involvement
right so the short-term mating strategy
that characterize Hedonism is literally
indistinguishable from the dark tetrad
orientation which is manipulative
Psychopathic narcissistic and sadistic
they had to include the they had to
widen the nomological Spectrum to
include sadism to get all the
co-occurring pathologies properly
clumped and so it's so interesting a
that this is something women should know
you know if you're dating a man whose
fundamental orientation is short-term
sexual gratification he's either
pursuing a psychopathic path of
manipulation or you're training him to
become that person one of the things
that that that also is fascinating about
all of this is that the amount of sexual
boredom in the society is extraordinary
so you have more sexual choice and
variety available than literally anytime
in human history given fre license by
the state because there are no
intermediate social institutions in
which sort of informal mechanisms of
disapproval could make themselves felt
and one of the things it turns out
psychologically that that human beings
are turned on by is taboo and so when
you get rid of literally every taboo
then people tend to get bored and then
the question is yeah well there's no
novelty right exactly not novelty goes
away and particularly men are driven by
sexual novelty it's something that that
is is very deeply ingrained and and the
power of what marriage was supposed to
be is it takes this this short-term
hedonic desire and it said because
female virtue still existed that in
order for you to obtain this you're
going to have to sublimate that desire
for the building of something greater I
mean the the part that of Freud that
everybody ignores is the part where
Freud actually is in favor of
sublimation it's only later it's only
later psychologists and philosophers who
suggest that sublimation needs to be
destroyed and done away with in order to
free all forms of of human artistic and
and material expression but Freud never
says that Freud says you actually have
to sublimate a lot of those short-term
hedonic desires to to something higher
but again that gets back to kind of the
fundamental premise that you were
speaking to which is there is this this
Narrative of accepted values that we all
used to live inside of and when you
destroy that narrative by saying for
some reason that it's not true because
it's not coming out of your own head
well once that happens we don't hold the
common narrative there are no common
narratives and if there are no common
narratives and everything is then
acceptable then what exactly is the
taboo what what what where does the
sublimation take place there is no
sublimation and there is no future
orientation because what sublimation
really is is orientation of short-term
in favor of
longterm well and in favor of other
people right so it's longterm plus the
social yeah well so so so you can do
that you can think about this
technically as well if there's no
uniting narrative here here's the
necessary consequences first of all
there's no higher order superordinate
aim and that means motivation itself on
the positive side takes a hit because we
experience positive
motivation and the impetus to move
forward so that would be curiosity hope
inspiration enthusiasm even aesthetic
interest we we experience that only in
relationship to an aim and so if you
destroy the ultimate aim you destroy the
structure upon which reward itself is
dependent apart from satiation induced
rewards right
and they produce quiessence not not
movement forward okay so so you lose
positive emotion then you multiply
negative emotion and the reason you do
that is because one of the things that
constrains your anxiety response which
is actually a calculation of the
entropic distance to a given destination
technically is if you produce a
multiplicity of aims then you increase
anxiety proportionately now you know
there's probably some optimization
function so that like a choice between
three aims is great and a choice between
100 is devastating okay so that's two
things that happens when the unifying
overarching theme disappears but there's
a third thing too which is which is
something you pointed to
so there's a relationship between
scarcity and deprivation and value right
and so if you are surfed by a stimulus
let's say or Reason resource so you're
overfed as soon as you're not hungry
food is of no interest if you're stuffed
food is
nauseating now you remember in The
Exodus seminar we covered I don't
remember if you were there for this but
I think you might have been there's this
there's a situation when the Israelites
are out in the desert wandering around
like demanded slaves and bitching about
the fact that they have no Tyrant they
start complaining about the fact that
they have they don't have enough to eat
and God sends them like quailes until
they're literally coming out of their
nostrils yeah first they complain about
the Mana and then well they complain
hungry and God sends the Mana and then
they say we're tired of the Mana we want
meat and God says you're going to have
as much meat as you could possibly
imagine here come here come God actually
gets angry and and actually Moses for
the first time gets angry at the people
over their requests at this
point right well and what happens is
because they have an absolute surplus of
what they
hypothetically find desirable it becomes
disgusting and this is this is certainly
the danger on the sexual front so we
don't know like we actually don't know
how much deprivation is necessary for
proper sexual function to make itself
manifest right is that you have
to and it doesn't take much thought to
figure this out it's a rare person who
hasn't primed their appetite with Hunger
before a Thanksgiving feast right you
you want to have a plate of pancakes at
5:00 if you're going to have a
Thanksgiving feast at 6 and you might
say well why not cuz more is better and
the answer is no the right amount is
better and the right amount involves a
certain amount of deprivation and I
think that's I I read this
interesting article yesterday showing
that women are more likely to lose
romantic interest as a relationship
progresses than men I don't think that's
the that's surprising they're higher in
trait neuroticism so they're more likely
to experience negative emotion and then
women are have
more their response to sexuality is more
multi-dimensional than men because the
risks are higher in any case one of the
ways around that is for men and women in
a marriage to stay apart from each other
for periods of these researchers looked
at eight hours if you get some distance
the desire reemerges then you were
talking about novelty and so is pretty
interesting too so you said men will
chase novelty in a sexual relationship
well I think part of what is incumbent
on married individuals is to figure out
how to keep that novelty alive right so
that means that each of them have to be
transforming and I think the best way to
do that is in relationship to a
spiritual Pursuit and then I think women
also want novelty but the novelty
they're looking for in men is probably
more multi-dimensional and
performative right because
women are hypergamous and they they like
men who are above them in the hierarchy
of status let's say or ability likely
ability and I think what women want are
dis novel displays of
hypergamous capacity and that that is
the novelty orientation for women in
relationship to sexuality well one of
the things that's actually fascinating
about this is that biblically speaking
right I mean not to get into abstruse
Jewish law but I mean this is actually
right in the forget about the absur
Jewish law and right in the Bible one of
the one of the mandates is that for a
period of at least one week out of every
month married couples are not supposed
to have sex right this is like right in
the Bible and so that one of the
purposes of that presumably would be to
create the scarcity and the novelty that
you're talking about because if you're
married then obviously there's
tremendous availability of sex I mean
Contra every single weird public opinion
out there married people tend to have
sex significantly more than than single
people and it is not particularly close
but theoretically the scarcity goes away
the novelty goes away and then so does
the romance and so danger anyways that's
a danger right and so the Bible
literally says like one week out of the
month minimum you're your toast you
can't you can't do anything during this
particular week and I think that again
there there's a good rationalistic and
there's a good way I shouldn't say
rationalistic because there's a reason
for it but it's something inherited
inherited wisdom over time is sort of
the message of of the Bible and I I
think that that's you know not knowing
why you do the thing but do the thing
and then it works is in some ways much
what we're talking about because that's
the story of what works is the story
right that's that's what we're really
talking about at the end of the
day once your business gets to a certain
size cracks start to emerge and things
you used to do in a day are now taking
over a week if this is you then you need
to check out net Suite 37,000 businesses
have upgraded to netsuite by Oracle
netsuite is the number one Cloud
Financial system streamlining accounting
financial management inventory HR and
more netsuite turns 25 this year that's
25 years of helping businesses do more
with less they can help you close your
books in days not weeks and drive down
costs because your business is one of a
kind you get a customized solution for
all of your key performance indicators
in one efficient system with one source
of Truth netw Suite will help you manage
risks get reliable forecasts and improve
margins I cannot stress enough that you
will have everything you need to grow
all in one place with netsuite right now
download Nets suite's popular kpi
checklist designed to give you
consistently excellent performance for
absolutely free at netsuite.com
jbp that's netsuite.com sjbp to get your
own key performance indicator checklist
again that's netsuite.com
sjbp yeah what works what works all
things considered over the the longest
possible span of time and situation yeah
and so with regards to narrative so you
imagine that each person's life is a
narrative right when described now
there's a competition
between there's a competition for
validity between those narratives and
here here's what we do so mer Eliot
tracked this with regard to the
development of religious narratives so
you imagine it's easy to understand and
it's very much like a large language
model derivation by the way you can
imagine that
there's a bunch of natives sitting
around a campfire talking about like
their the 10 people they admire the
most okay so
now what that points to is that there's
a commonality across those people and
the commonality is commonality of what
constitutes what is
admirable now you can imagine another
person a young person maybe sitting
there listening to these accounts right
but and then you ask him later what the
discussion was and he doesn't tell you
all 10 stories he gives you an
Amalgamated composite of what
constitutes the admirable hero as a
consequence of deriving the central
point from the amalgamation of 10
stories now this is exactly what young
boys do when they play the role of
father in a pretend play bout they don't
actually imitate directly through
onetoone corresponding mimicry the
actions of their father they watch their
father in multiple situations and
Abstract out the commonalities that make
him a father right so we abstract out
the commonalities of admirability across
a set of compelling stories those
stories Echo to us because they attract
our interest right so that's the
correspondence between the archetype and
the Soul that's a good way of thinking
about it then you can imagine that as
the Hero
Stories Aggregate and increase in
sophistication that they Transcendent
nature starts to make itself more and
more manifest because you get a pattern
that's been applicable across many
generations and situations and so this
is also the answer to the problem of
pathological consensus you know like
it's a conservative it's a conservative
dictum that you should do by and large
what other people do but obviously that
goes astray in times like when they're
when we're possessed by idolatry and
ideological idiot
Nazi Germany maest China stalinist
Soviet Union and and all modern
universities let's say so then you might
say well we still need the
consensus and and what has worked and
what we've observed to work is a
consensus what do we do if that goes
astray and the answer is well we also
have the consensus that's developed
across time and the consensus that's
developed across time is instantiated in
our traditional narratives so there're a
they're an
anchor that can be used to resist
movement let's say in a pathological
Direction when the consensus itself goes
wrong that's what it looks like to me
and I think that's associated with the
vertical axis of Mount Sinai
symbolically as well as the horizontal
axis that really does constitute
something like a
consensus so Jordan I I wonder what you
think about this proposition that's
occurring to me while you're talking
which is that one of the Great failur
that we're that we're experiencing in
modern society obviously is a failure of
conversation that that there's a
difference between verbal and oral
learning and just reading things and
that as we become a society where we
don't talk to each other as much that
one of the things you lose about the
narrative is the person who's telling
you the narrative that when your parent
tells you a bedtime story it's not just
the Bedtime Story it's that your parents
is telling you the bedtime story when
you sit around the campfire and you
abstract that larger story it's the
people who you're talking to who you
trust to be good people who are telling
you their various stories that allow you
to abstract that out and so as literacy
has increased over the course of the
world that's allowed for the spread of
knowledge but it's also shallowed some
of the some of the stories themselves
because you sitting in a room reading
the Bible is actually not the same thing
as you sitting in a room with people
discussing the Bible like we did during
The Exodus seminar and getting various
points of view then abstracting out the
lesson and so as we move from a so that
engages in conversation and oral
learning to a society that's very much
about you and advice in front of you or
you and a book in front of you or you in
a Tik Tok video in front of you that
that that isn't actually enough that the
the form of tradition that we need to
get back to is a form of oral learning
and conversation a sort of back and
forth dialogue that allows us to
actually understand the narratives in a
powerful way otherwise you do end up
with the postmodern dilemma of I'm
sitting there and I'm reading a text
that I just discovered and I'm bringing
whatever my prior biases are to that
text you actually do need a teller of
the tale in order for you to fully
understand what's going on you well you
you point to a bunch of things there so
one
is
okay so let's blame some of this on the
Protestants and their insistence that
the biblical Corpus per se is
sufficient now now one of the huge
advantages of that was the promotion of
literacy worldwide so we're going to
give the devil is Du but it it does have
the problem that the two-fold problem
that you just described the first
problem Jung pointed to this the first
problem is that Protestant tends towards
fractionation and you can see that with
the multiplicity of Protestant churches
because if it's just you in the text
there's an infinite number of 's and I
think the logical extension of this are
is the identity claims that the radical
Types on the hedonic left are now
putting forward right I'm The
Interpreter I'm the only interpreter
right it's between me and God and no one
else it's like well that's great unless
you're deluded in which case the god
that you think you're following might
not be God at all now then you might say
well how might I determine whether the
god that's calling to me is God or Satan
let's say and part of your answer is you
had a twofold answer one is well is the
story being told to you by people actual
embodied people that you actually
respect as a consequence of your
knowledge of let's say their ethical
conduct and the other is well is there
an active and living discussion around
such issues that's conducted by a group
of such people so you know one of the
things Pou has helped me with a fair bit
is understanding more deeply the role of
ritual
and
congregation in the maintenance of
social structure but also in the
transmission of the stories that that
need to be transmitted
as an academic type and also as someone
let's say as an intellectual prone to
The Temptations of the luciferian
intellect it's very enticing for me to
think that it can just be me in the text
but the problem with that is that you're
blindest at your blindest spots and you
need that additional Community to tap
you out of your
delusional self delusional unconscious
self-serving atomistic individual
individuality into something more like
the universal space and you know talked
to Harris Sam Harris recently and
Sam and I and I suspect you as well
share a preoccupation with the reality
of evil and part of the reason that Sam
beat the drum so hard for objective
standards of morality grounded in
science so an attempt to reduce the
narrative to the objective was because
he wanted to put a firm foundation under
claims that there was a Transcendent
good and the only way he could see to do
that was through the empirical rote
now you know I've been looking at Robert
axelrod's work on the emergence of
cooperation and iterated systems and and
I think so I think there actually is a
place where the approach that Sam favors
can be integrated with the sort of
things that you and I and The Exodus
participants for example have been
discussing so imagine
that there's a landscape of
repeated interactions let's say they're
voluntary trades of information of
emotion of goods the voluntary part's
important and that across those trades
there's a pattern now Axel Rod showed in
his computational Sim simulations that
if you and I were trading under certain
conditions the best strategy the winning
strategy in a competition of strategies
would be for you and I to
cooperate but if you cheated for me to
whack you with proportionate force and
then to go back to
cooperation that so that's tit Fort now
you imagine that our lives are
characterized by a sequence of repeated
trades in multiple Dimensions with
multiple players in a game of
indeterminate length and that there's a
pattern of interaction that is optimal
across that
plethora of
interactions I think that
the highest order narrative that grips
us so we'd find that compelling that
would be told by the people we admire
and that's in concordance with the
biblical narrative is a map of the
strategy that works best in repeated
interactions with multiple people across
the broadest possible span of time so
that's a place where the empirical and
the theological could reach perfect
concordance and well I I think the
evidence points in that
direction yeah I totally agree with with
all of that and and I also think that
when when you talk about you know the
fact that the these narratives have to
be told to you by people that you trust
that people who you consider to be
virtuous and all the rest of this I
think that even people who don't
advocate for that understand it innately
which is why attacks on the church for
example are never attacks on the Bible
those are not effective attacks right
the sort of attacks that you see from
Richard Dawkins for example about the
text of the Bible that never has any
impact on people who are truly religious
because truly religious people exist
within the context of religious
communities the most damaging thing to
any institution is an attack on the
people who comprise the institution and
make the rules as nonvirtuous and
violative of the fundamental principles
of that institution this is why the
attacks that have been most damaging to
the Catholic Church have nothing to do
with Catholic Doctrine and everything to
do with the activities inside the
Catholic Church surrounding for example
coverups of child molestation it's why
attacks any institution are going to be
the most telling based on taking people
who you previously thought were virtuous
advocates for the system and bringing
them low and and tearing them down and I
I think that one of the things that that
we've seen wholesale well that's also
that's Al okay so that's also why so in
the gospel texts Christ's fundamental
enemies in
the Earthly world so to speak so
excluding
Transcendent evil are the Pharisees the
scribes and the lawyers so I've been
going through those stories in depth and
so the Pharisees are moral Hypocrites
they're the people see this is another
way that we can sort these dis disputes
out with people like Dawkin and Harris
because what they do is they identify
the religious Enterprise with the
totalitarian
proclivity but that bespeaks a lack of
differentiated judgment because this is
where I think the arrow hits its Mark
the worst totalitarian Hypocrites use
the religious Enterprise as the most
effective disguise for their
Psychopathic
maneuverings and so and I think the
separation of church and state is a
protection against that so like and we
know this clinically to some degree
because if I'm a
narcissist a psychopathic narcissist
I'm going to claim victim status and
milk the compassionate for all their
worth being relatively kous myself and
unfeeling in the in the uh presence of
other people's pain perfectly willing to
manipulate that and then I'm also going
to Proclaim exactly as the Pharisees do
in the gospel text I'm going to Proclaim
my moral virtue to elevate my standing
in the community I'm going to pray in
public like the protesters do so and I'm
going to take the best seats in the
synagogue right by parading around my
moral virtue and so that ties into what
you're saying because the most effective
way of demolishing the traditional
proprieties the traditional Endeavor is
to claim to embody them while using
God's name in vain while pretending
moral virtue oriented towards the
highest I'm saving the planet well
really in reality doing nothing but
pursuing your own evil agenda and so we
could be wise enough to see the
wolves in sheep's clothing to see the
totalitarians like the Iranian
fundamentalists who use the religious
Enterprise to justify their own their
own selfing self-serving behavior and
then bring they they they milk it and
they discredit it simultaneously so
that's like a truly malevolent act right
it's only for you plus it discredits
what what is Holy and that's that's
praying in public
and and there's tremendous amount of the
Gospel texts devoted
to insisting that that's a cardinal ill
and that's the same thing as using God's
name in vain the third commandment of
Moses right it's a and I think it's one
of the cardinal sins of our time to
parade your moral virtue around in the
name of what's holiest when all you're
doing is elevating your own moral status
I mean I certainly think that that's the
case and I also think that we have to be
careful on the other side not to fall
into the easy use of the charge of
hypocrisy to destroy the principle
because you can see that exact same
attack being wildly misused you can see
some everyone is sinful and so the idea
is that if I can discredit an idea by
attacking The Advocates of the idea as
sinful well then you can basically
destroy any ideology that way it's why
religious people for example very often
say oh we're held to a higher standard
well I mean to be fair you should be
held to a higher standard you do
Proclaim to be religious but it's also
very easy to destroy entire swab of
ideology based on this and using using
human beings inherent fall and inherent
sinfulness in order to discredit you
know and you see this literally with
every ideology right capitalism is bad
because bur made off ex okay so so I got
a good story about that for you so you
remember in the story of
Noah so Noah Shepherds his family and
the human race for that matter through
the return of the precos moonic chaos
right the waters come back God floods
everything returning it to the state
that preceded creation and brings up a
new civilization and Noah is to thank
for that now he goes out after he lands
because it's been a harrowing trip let's
say plants a Vineyard and proceeds to
get rip roaring drunk and so that's a
human failing and Noah is only
characterized in that text as wise in
his Generations right he's not a saint
he's not the Savior he's a good man but
a man so he has f
now here's what happens this is so cool
so he drinks like three gallons of wine
and and passes out and he's St naked I
think his like robes are lifted up over
his body and he's laying there in his
tent exposed and naked and his son Ham
comes along and has a pretty good laugh
about how stupid his father is which is
pretty damn ungrateful thing to do and
foolish because ham would be it would be
of great
it be a great accomplishment of ham to
be half the man that his father was so
anyways he laughs at Noah and then he
gets his brothers and he says you know
hey the old man's you know drunk out of
his mind why don't we go and and he's
all sprawled out let's go over there and
we can all join in a good laugh and his
other Sons Noah's other Sons take a
blanket and they back into the tent and
they cover Noah okay and so they show
him respect despite his
flaws now the way that story ends is
that in Tradition is
that slaves are the descendants of ham
and so the moral of the story is that if
you're foolish enough to dispense with
your wise traditions because you can
point to flaws that inherit to men
better than you far better than you
let's say Thomas Jefferson for example
that you are walking a pathway that will
will turn you and your descendants into
the slaves of people who have proper
respect for tradition and that seems to
me to be
well like that's spot on that's dead on
it it Nails The Pride a because Canada
is unbelievably appalling in this regard
our politicians will apologize even for
Imagined historical wrongs even if they
show no sign whatsoever of being
anywhere near as wise as the people who
hypothetically committed those wrongs
just so they can parade their moral
virtue in comparison to the Great Men of
the past and one of the things too that
is worth thinking about in that regard
is there's almost nothing more cowardly
than attacking the dead because even
more than The Unborn they can't defend
themselves right so
so well and it's very difficult to read
into that attempt to
demoralize and devalue the past you
don't you can't read into that the
attempt on the part of the people who
are doing the criticism to be better
people you can read into that their
willingness to condemn and make
contemptuous to redown to their unearned
moral virtue and that defines the
universities now you all these bloody
literary critics who are above the
people whose Works they depend on and
criticize all these art critics who have
perverted the
the museums with their commentary on the
hypothetical sins of the artists that's
exactly what they're doing it's very
amusing to consider that you know their
Destiny their Destiny is going to be
indistinguishable from that of slaves I
mean one of the things that you're
talking about here again gets back to
that victim victimizer narrative the
more successful you were as a human
being dead or alive the more you are
then targeted for your for your failings
because your success must be a sign of
your oppression and that's that's really
most of what we're watching right now is
the Coalition of the supposedly
marginalized who are coming together to
destroy the thing that they hate in
common not because they have anything in
common themselves but because they
believe that the reason they're
marginalized is out of some sort of
unfairness or pure power dynamic as
opposed to the fact that in a free
Society the people who very often end up
marginalized are the people who don't
abide by the common rules of the society
and in a working Society those rules are
good doesn't mean every rule is good but
it means that a lot of rules are pretty
damn good look look Ben it's also the
case
that this the intersectionalist
basically make this claim even though
they don't notice
like we could each
find Dimensions along which we were
marginalized and maybe still are for
that matter I mean within every human
being there are going to be dimensions
of lesser attainment and greater
attainment and so there's some Dimension
along which we are comparative victims
right and I mean it's certainly the case
as well and the intersectionalist have
this right to some degree is you do run
across people from time to time who
appear to have very little going for
them across very many dimensions right
and and their lives are
genuinely difficult and hard now I've
met many people like that in my clinical
practice and I've also observed and this
is another eror in the determinism
that's characteristic of the victim
victimizer narrative and the Marxist and
materialist approach to the world you
would expect that people who were
marginalized on many dimensions
simultaneously might Harbor a certain
amount of bitterness and resentment as a
consequence of that and a certain amount
of Justified hatred for the status quo
but my experience as a clinician has
been that people who have been bittered
tormented are they may be more likely to
collapse
altogether but they also seem to be me
to be more likely to have the
opportunity to derive an absolutely
Stellar character out of their
Misadventures right to conclude from
everything that they have been subject
to that taking on a rule of the bully
themselves for example if they were from
an abused an abusing family is the wrong
conclusion to derive from that example
and we know that this is true even
mathematically because if all abusers
abused it would take no time for every
family to be characterized by
abuse so what you see in the clinical
literature is that people marginalized
by abuse let's say genuine abuse if you
look an abuser someone who abuses their
kids they are statistically much more
likely to have been abused as kids but
if you take the population of every one
have abused by abused in childhood only
a small proportion of them become
abusers again when when when you talk
about the marginalized and and you know
the ability to to Rise Up from that it
it seems to me that very often the
people who are who legitimately
experienced the hardship in life as you
say the preconditions to success are
sometimes there specifically because
once the conditions for their
marginalization are removed if given the
opportunity they can succeed what we're
seeing in society is the is a self
enervation it's people who are self
marginalizing people who don't actually
have any reason to claim marginalization
or very little to claim marginalization
who don't have tons of obstacles and
then when they are unsuccessful it is
significantly easier to suggest that it
must be some external force that is
marginalizing me this is how you fall
into conspiracism is is by suggesting
like well you know you've had AER you
see this in cloudine Gay's you know
essay in the New York Times where she's
a victim of circumstance and she been
victimized by everybody no one's had
more opportunity in life than clouding
gay but it would be much harder for her
because she's had all these those
opportunities to say okay well the
reason I'm failing is because of
marginalization and if I weren't
marginalized I would do X Y and Z she
can't really say that because she wasn't
presented with the with the
marginalization when when it comes to
you know people being bullied and people
who are being mistreated I think one of
the great lies that that were told is
that the reason bullying has to stop is
because if you are bullied you are thus
much more likely to be destroyed as as a
human being I find that many of the most
successful people I know uh again this
anecdotal but many of the most
successful people I know are viciously
bullied his children and in fact use
that as as fuel to fire them to Greater
success because the idea was okay I do
have to work twice as hard I do have to
but if I do that then I am going to
succeed there's I think in other words
there's a difference between labeling
the entire system unfair and labeling
the situation in which you live unfair
those are two very different things if
the entire system is unfair there's no
way to fight against it if the situation
which you currently are is unfair the
way to fight against that is to move
beyond that particular situation I think
you you would be hardpressed to
find a man or woman who hadn't been
bullied you know I'm I'm thinking about
a friend of
mine who was a pretty tough kid he ended
up going off to work in the rigs when he
was about nine and he was a tough kid I
think he got kicked out of school when
he was in grade nine I mean it was grade
10 I think he got kicked out of school
if I remember correctly because he body
checked
the very well-built and strong gym
teacher in a hockey game and then
challenged him to a fight so this was a
tough kid this this gym teacher could do
an Iron Cross by the way like it was a
major feat for this 16-year-old kid to
stand up to him I'm not justifying it
I'm just pointing it out but I also
remember him in grade six being chased
and pounded daily by by the bullies who
were in grade
eight you know I mean most
boys I don't know any I can't remember
any of my childhood friends who weren't
subjected to some degree of sustained
bullying because even if you're the
toughest kid in your class you're not
the toughest kid there's no 12-year-old
or virtually none who's tougher than
like the 15 yearolds that just doesn't
happen and then you and then you might
say well what about women it's like
have you watched women like they may not
be getting into physical altercations
although that's not as rare as we think
it is but the probability that any given
woman has been unmercifully bullied by
some pack of Mean Girls for some
prolonged period of time is virtually
certain that could happen within a
family as a consequence of sibling
rivalry or it can happen in the broader
social sphere and you know I've been
reading about the the Christmas stories
again I've been writing about the
gospels which is why I'm bringing them
up but you know you see in the birth of
Christ the same threatened Beginnings as
you see in the birth of Moses right so
Christ is born in the lowliest of places
and worse than that he's subject to
severe murderous persecution by the
state authorities now Moses is
threatened in the same way he's born to
Jewish slaves and the Pharaoh determines
that all the firstborns are going to be
killed now you might ask well why are
these two great Heroes presented as
victims and the answer is well the
vulnerability that enables us to weave a
victim victimizer narrative around our
own lives is built into every life like
everyone starts out unbelievably
vulnerable and sub to the depredations
of nature chaos and the depredations of
social order and we all have to contend
with that and one conclusion to draw
from that is that the world is dominated
by power the proper story is oppressor
and oppressed and the appropriate
response is the kind of bitter
resentment that characterized Cain and
another response
is power corrupts and the world is full
of unfortunate vulnerability but our job
is to act as moral agents to not make a
bad situation worse and to strive toward
the
good and that and it's also the claim
that that our reliable Traditions were
founded on the latter proposition and
not on the basis of power and I also
think so I looked into the
anthropological literature on the
tradition of the
Elder so most societies have Elders now
if the marxists were correct the ERS
would be the rich people who had power
and they would they would have been
using their socioeconomic status as a
kind of cudgel to dominate the positions
of authority that isn't what happens in
the anthropological literature the
elders are I think the easiest way to
characterize them them they're people
who have a lengthy publicly observable
and genuine history of
honesty productivity and
generosity and they've derived a wisdom
from that and the reason they're Elders
is because people go to them voluntarily
to ask them for their
advice right well that has nothing to do
with
power quite the contrary quite the
contrary and you have to be a real
bloody cynic to look at a functional
Society like the United States and say
oh that's all power it's like no some of
it is power and when it corrupts it
corrupts in the direction of power just
like a marriage might if husband and
wife start to play Tyrant to one another
but that doesn't mean that that's the
bloody fundamental Story upon which the
whole thing was founded that's exactly
obviously we're in agreement on that I
mean I I think that the the attempt to
do away with traditional wisdom
particularly in the form of the elderly
has also you know had some pretty dire
After Effects not just in terms of loss
of wisdom but in terms of of we
ourselves one of the purposes of a of a
community like a traditional social
Community the the elders in that Society
provided what you're talking about the
wisdom and the knowledge and the advice
and in return the people who were
younger basically supported them I mean
that was the economic deal you you
supported your parents and one of the
reasons that people had kids is because
they knew that in their old age they
would have to be supported by their
children but their responsibilities were
not alleviated the the grandparents had
a ma major role to play in kinship
networks it's not as though they just
sort of dropped off and lived in the
back room and watched TV all day they
actually had a role to play in child
child's care and child's rearing and
advice to parents and all the rest of
this sort of stuff and then gradually as
we saw the encroachment of an Ever
larger state that basically took away
the responsibility of parents to
grandparents what you saw as the
marginalization of the elderly it didn't
make the elderly more valuable it made
them significantly less valuable the the
the fact that you as a child were
supposed to support your parents meant
that you also made demands of your
parents like I need your advice on
something I want to know what's going on
being able to to just you know ship
Grandma off to an old age home or
Shuffle her onto Social Security and
then you know let her spend her her
waning years you know watching watching
soap operas it's been devastating for
not only the the elderly in the United
States who have largely been
marginalized but to younger Generations
who really need the wisdom of the
elderly in order to continue to function
we we've broken the chain of
transmission and we have done that
through I think economic methods and one
of the great untold stories that I think
some of the Nationalist conservatives
have right is is that economic
conditions have broken down many of the
social relationships that were that that
were not primarily economic but had
economic benefits to them that have now
been removed by the state now I think
where the Nationalist conservatives are
wrong is they attribute that to
capitalism whereas I think that it's
much more state interventionism in these
particular areas alleviating burdens of
responsibility but one of the things
that at root is there is that we tend to
think in Western Society of
responsibility as burden when in fact
responsibility for the vast majority of
people across time is actually a form of
Freedom responsibility it's meaning and
freedom yes I mean as you become it's
why as you become older you as a person
want more responsibility you don't just
want the ability to go out on a Saturday
night you also want the responsibility
that comes along with that because every
duty every every freedom is going to
come along with a certain level of
additional responsibility if you want to
use that freedom freedom wisely it's why
you know when you see small children I
watch my own kids right they're 97 three
and and seven months when I watch them
the thing that they play at is not
actually like cruising around in the car
what they tend to play at is the role
play of responsibility it's why small
small girls play at being Mom right they
take dolls and they they play at being
Mom it's why young boys will play at at
building things it's an actual social
function that they are playing at very
often and that's something that we that
kids aspire to then we as adults were
like well I can't believe my kids want
to they can't wait to become adults look
at all the responsibilities I have but I
remember back to when you were a kid
that was a cool thing responsibility was
a cool thing and I mean mean I still
think as an adult that responsibility is
a cool thing the coolest thing that I do
is the stuff that I'm responsible for
whether it's my kids and my wife and my
household or whether it's the employees
of my company like that that the more
responsibility you have the I think
frankly the cooler your life is because
those things don't hem you down they
Define you without that what what
exactly well well we could say voluntary
responsibility voluntarily undertaken
and accepted yes right I don't think
there's any difference between that and
meaning now if it's forced on you that's
a different story but we also know from
the biblical Corpus as well that there's
a
tremendous emphasis by god let's say on
on uh what objecting strenuously to
excessive use of force never use Force
if it's not justified and it's justified
in the most constrained of circumstances
Moses is bitterly punished for using
Force even at the end of his life so so
you know here's something too with
regards to your observation on the
elderly older people you know Jonathan
height has written a fair bit about the
codling of the American mind and we see
the infantilization of children and
young adults and even adults themselves
increasingly characterizing educational
institutions say but maybe part of that
is a consequence of the breakdown of
intergenerational transmission of
knowledge with regards to child rearing
because one of the things I've noticed
with my kids is that like they they had
the model of our family for
disciplining for disciplinary practices
and they know those models but I've
watched and it's often useful for them
to have
the example of the response of Tammy and
I to the misbehavior of our
grandchildren to bolster my children in
their conviction that
intervening to discipline them so that
they're socially desirable is acceptable
so imagine this
Ben so the fundamental
Drive behind infant care is service to
the infant self-sacrificing service to
the infant and the rule is if the infant
manifests any displays of distress that
your primary moral obligation is to
alleviate that and that's 100% true for
the first 8 months let's
say Okay so the default feminine
proclivity is the amelioration of
emotional
distress immediate amelioration of
emotional distress now that becomes
problematic when there's a conflict
between short-term emotional distress
and long-term
thriving and you might say that the role
of wisdom is to know when to step in
to allow short-term emotional distress
to be tolerated or even
encouraged if the benefit is an
incremented long-term
adaptation now older people are wise
enough to know well you know your kid
wants that toy in the grocery store
right now and is willing to have a fit
about it but if you give in to his
tantrum and reward it you're going to
produce a child who other children can't
stand and because he'll play in that
infantile manner whenever he's in a
social
circumstance now you can model that with
new parents and say look here's how you
regulate the child's emotional distress
and you can say and you want to do that
so your child's well socialized so that
everyone will like him or her so they
can engage in productive reciprocal
interactions but I don't think you can
do that with just advice I think you
have to model it I mean I totally agree
with that my wife and I are very close
with my parents and also with with her
parents and one of the rules in the
household is that you know my parents
discipline my kids when my kids are
doing something wrong I actually want
them to discipline my kids by the way I
don't actually think this is relegated
to to grandparents I think that Elders
in the community and other other parents
we know who have older kids I think it's
actually quite incumbent on societes we
have this weird thing in the United
States actually that is not usual in
some other societies in other societies
when it comes to Children acting up in
public for example it's actually pretty
much expected that somebody's going to
the kid whether it is the parent or not
the parent you see this in a lot of
other societies and it actually makes I
think for for better child bearing and
rearing because it's considered sort of
a social responsibility that if some kid
is violating the rules yeah exactly then
then there will be someone there to say
the thing in the United States because
we're very autonomous and we're very
autonomy oriented the idea is that if
you say a word to my child I'm going to
be super duper angry at you and very
very upset about that but I I don't
actually think that that's right and
it's certainly not true in for example
my own religious community if we're over
at somebody's house and what we're
constantly interacting obviously with
people in my immediate religious
community it's a very tight-knit
community and if we're over at
somebody's house and my kid does
something wrong I I want somebody to
discipline my kid and in the context of
of generations I mean what you're
talking about what what basically the
elderly are is they are the living
tradition right in fact in in the Jewish
Community you're supposed to stand up
for an elderly person and a Torah
scholar the same way and when they enter
the room theoretically you're supposed
to actually stand up in respect to that
person why well because my parents have
already seen the outgrowth of either
doing it right or doing it wrong when I
was a kid right I only have the
immediate knowledge of of how old my
kids are right I know how to raise a
nine-year-old I don't know how to raise
a 16y old I don't have a 16-year-old I
know how to I know how to raise my
three-year-old to be nine I know how to
raise my seven-year-old to be nine I
don't know how to raise my nine-year-old
to be 16 and so you know that's where my
parents really are effective because
they've done it four times so they they
know how to raise a nine-year-old to be
16 and how not to raise a 9-year-old to
be 16 and so again the marginalization
of the elderly largely you know for for
economic reasons the removal of the
elderly from the home for example which
again is strange because American homes
have have grown we've actually I mean
one of the great lies of of modern
American economics is that people are
somehow living worse now than they were
in 1980 which is not true and one of the
things that we have is more living room
and one of the things that theoretically
we could do is have our parents live
with us more often if our parents can't
afford to live on on their own and I
think that would actually be of of great
benefit the lack of intergenerational
dialogue is truly bad by the way it's
working in both directions people who
are 40 aren't having kids and also their
parents aren't with them and so they're
they're just kind of there and you want
to talk about prolonged adolescence not
having kids and not having parents is
the is the definition I think of
prolonged adolescence well the other
downside of that too is that one thing
you can be certain of is that you're
going to get
old and so there is really no difference
there is no difference between how we
treat the elderly and how we will be
treated like those are the same thing
and that should give everyone pause
really like that should get everyone
pause you know because we tend even the
fact that we have a conception category
like the elderly in some ways is absurd
because well it's a category that will
include everyone so how we treat the
elderly is no different than how we
treat ourselves and The Logical
corollary to that is well we should
treat the elderly like we want to be
treated because well that's coming down
the pipelines and a lot bloody f than
you think too so you know it's it's
obviously complicated because well
because life is complicated so there's
really no sense in even in going into
that but it's definitely something
that's that's that's that's much worth
consideration yeah
so so let's turn from that for a minute
I'm curious about what it is that's
occupying you intellectually these days
what
problems are you trying to solve and I
I'm also curious about how that might
tangle into the daily wire
stated ambition to expand their
offerings both conceptually and on the
popular front beyond the realm of the
immediate the political so what what is
it that you're trying to think through
what are you working on I mean so I'm
I'm working on a bunch of projects I'm
obviously political I just went down to
the southern border to observe what's
happening there which is a fullscale
disaster area uh and um and you know
foreign policy related you know my my
thoughts very much these days are about
where are the hot spots in the world you
know where if there were to be a larger
War where is that likely to break out
what are the trigger events likely to be
there the thing that occupies me I think
most of the time these days is what are
the principles that a society must
pursue in order for it to maintain peace
health of its citizens mental health of
it citizens the possibility of
fulfillment of its of it citizen I think
that's the same stuff that occupies us
all the time and that manifests in a
variety of contexts but to me one of the
things that I'm seeing I was talking
about this with a friend a little bit
earlier is that in the political realm
which is where I spend most of my time
there's this bizarre situation where so
much disillusionment has set in with
politics normally disillusionment sets
in with politics because we feel that
politics is broken with principle we say
we have these certain principles and our
politicians just aren't meeting with our
principles in the same way we were
talking about religious hypocrisy
earlier that we have a set things that
we want from our politicians we're not
getting them and so we're very upset
with that and so in the name of
principle we have to change our politics
but one of the things that's that's I
think happened is we're so disillusioned
with with politics that we've also
actually become disillusioned with
principles and so I'm not sure where the
the potential unification is going to
come from do do we need to focus more on
the principles or more on the politics
because there's great fragmentation on
both sides of the political aisle right
now over principle itself I think I I I
think that and this is in keeping with
what we've been discussing in this in
this uh in this
interview and I think it's in keeping
with what we've been trying to do with
this Alliance for responsible
citizenship Endeavor is that I think
we're in a moment of crisis with which
is also why concentrated on the counter
Enlightenment you know we're at a time
where fractionation and disagreement is
so profound that we have to go
underneath the principles to to what's
genuinely sacred and sort that out again
I think that's partly why I think you
know one of the things I've noticed Ben
you tell me if this has been the case
for you but especially in the last year
it's become increasingly difficult to do
a podcast with a political figure of any
stature that gets any views you know
there's SP sporadic exceptions to that
rule but I did one with disantis you
know and he's certainly a top 10
political figure I would say worldwide
certainly in the US and
he did a credible job you know but the
view count
was not great not great and certainly
the Lesser political figures in terms of
General popularity that I've interviewed
Mike Pence for example and and Chris
Christie and others um they're
performing dismally we also saw at the
ark conference that people who spoke
about first
principles had videos that went viral
when we released them on YouTube and
anybody who spoke politically just
nothing like it didn't matter what their
reputation was man it didn't even really
matter what their quality of speech was
if they weren't
addressing even what was under first
principles there was no interest I
totally agree with that I mean I'm
seeing that myself and you know which is
kind of an astonishing thing because it
fundamentally presupposes that our
institutions are not the issue it
fundamentally presupposed like we're all
focused on in politics how do you fix
the institutions how do you change the
the balance of power how do you change
the structures but what you're saying
and what I think we're all saying is
that it's a much more severe problem
than that the institutions are sitting
at the very top and the institutions are
meant to do things like counterbalance
interest against interest in the United
States but what if there's not even a
broadscale recognition of what interests
are what what if the fundamental terms
of the debate have so radically changed
that we can't even decide what we're
debating on and anymore and that's also
what it feels like it feels like we
don't even know very often sort of the
rubric that the people we're talking
with are are working under because the
fundamental terms of commonality the
language itself is just not there it's
just gone and so you you well you
remember that's that's what happens in
the Tower of Babel yes right is so this
is a tower built to a false god and the
consequence of that is that nobody can
talk to anybody anymore the language is
fragment and that is exactly the
situation we're in now I mean I think
the best indication of that is that we
that we have conversations about what
constitutes a woman right exactly and
that's that's that's so insane I
actually don't think that there's any
place to go on the insanity front past
that when you lose that commonality when
you lose the commonality of sexual
identification everything else is
completely up for grabs yeah I I mean I
think that's totally true I think we
listen I think it's gone to we have
commonality on what it means to be a
human being anymore and so you know and
and those lines are actually being
blurred more sophisticated fashion by AI
than than you have with sexual binary
but it's it's it's really you know but
at the same time what's made it so
difficult is that you know you want to
have these conversations with people but
there's an entire punishment structure
that has now been attached to the
conversations themselves and so having a
conversation with somebody who's
perceived as being quote unquote of the
other side even if that's not rooted in
principle because you can't name what
the other side is based on principle
anymore because principles politically
don't don't really matter but there is a
punishment structure that does exist
with finding too much common ground with
somebody who may oppose you the
Democrats the Democrats are particularly
possessed by that Terror you know I've
tried for years to get leading Democrats
who will happily talk to me privately to
come on my podcast and it's been six
years that I've been trying to do that
and with very very few exceptions the
response has been
essentially not that they're not
interested but that they're terrified
that they'll be pecked to death now and
now the terrible consequence of that is
in part that not only have those
conversations not occurred and I would
conduct them in good faith and I offer
all my guests like editing rights over
the outcome or the right even to scrap
the whole interview and that's a genuine
offer no one's ever taken me up on
either of those by the way but um now I
think the moment for that kind of I
actually think the moment for that kind
of political dialogue has probably
passed because my sense is now that even
if I got leading Democrats with maybe a
tiny number of exceptions on my podcast
no one would watch them right no I I
think that's right so that I think I I
think that's totally right and so the
question becomes what kind of
conversations are productive at this
point and and so what what you're seeing
is that in that vacuum in the vacuum
where the conversation doesn't we can't
have that that Council of people sitting
around the fire and talking about virtue
because nobody has a common concept of
virtue you see figures who are arising
again across the political aisle who
just use extremely charged emotivist
language and and that extremely charged
emotivist language goes directly to the
root of how people feel without any sort
of virtuous substructure and so it's I'm
making this statement the only reason
you would disagree with this statement
is because you're an evil person who's a
child molester I'm not kidding I mean
this is this is literally the level of
discourse in in so much of the in so
much of sort of the cultural sphere and
and so how do you how do you even how do
you build on that and and to me what
that says is that you know maybe the the
time for large scale broad scope 30,000
foot building is ending and and what we
actually need to do is go back to the
campfire meaning that make people you
know privy to the campfire but one of
the things that you've been doing a lot
with with things like the exies or the
Gen or or some of the other things
you're doing is getting people giving
people access to that campfire of people
who they see as virtuous that they can
actually have that sort of conversation
be in dialogue with that but a lot of
that's going to have to take place on
the small scale and social media
radically opposes the small scale it's a
scalable Enterprise in which the person
with the most hits is is rewarded I'm
not sure there's going to be a
substitute in the future for in-person
events and meetings with people that are
going to allow them to find again the
the little platoons of society that have
been broken up are going to have to be
rebuilt well I I think that that's
partly why my tour tours have
been popular because it's a mystery in
some ways right because much of what I
say you can get your F of whatever I
have to say
online now I do say new things in my
public appearances but I don't think
that people fundamentally come there for
the new things that's like a bonus the
reason they come there is to find a
community right to do something
Collective exactly to engage in a
collective celebration and Gathering and
so and it does seem to me too that
especially as the ability to produce
fake videos propagates and we're going
to be increasingly unwilling to separate
the wheat from the chaff in the virtual
world that the value of in-person
meetings is going to increase so so and
with regards to the shallowness of the
political dialogue you know I've been
following this bill acman Chris rufo
Claudine gay Harvard episode Amman as
you know is a billionaire who's now a
Democrat political activist taking a
somewhat conservative Tack and I've been
watching that him working at least side
by side with Christopher rufo but and
I'm not displeased about the outcome but
when I'm watching that I keep
thinking well it's good that Mr
Amman has noticed the corruption of
Harvard
but he's just it's the wrong level of
analysis because the corruption that
made Claudine gay a reality and then
even more profoundly made the spectacle
in DC where the upen MIT and Harvard
presidents made absolutely Dreadful
prosterus parody fools of themselves
that's reflective of a conflict that's
almost unimaginably deep
and dispensing with Claudine
gay there will have virtually no impact
on that I mean I totally agree with that
I will I will say that that Amman
himself has become an anti-de activist
which means that he is engaging at a
level that I frankly didn't expect him
to to engage at or or many other people
in this particular battle but yeah I
mean I think that the the the problems
in American society run so deep and in
Western Society run so deep that the
only way to fight them is the is the
hard thing that nobody wants to do right
the easiest thing to do in politics is
to speak into camera and distribute it
on YouTube to a million people you can
do that that's not super hard to do the
hard thing to do is to raise a good
family the hard thing to do is to join a
religious Community the hard thing to do
is to actually build again those
structures that we all took for granted
for literally dozens of generations over
time that have been completely
eviscerated and destroyed that that
that's so hard to do and so intimidating
to do that it almost feels useless while
you're doing it because the scale of the
problem is so large that it feels like
when you're piling a pebble you know a
top of a wall and then the tsunami is
coming what are you doing but the answer
is that again it's going to take a lot
of Pebbles to actually Build That Wall
well it's also the case too that that
that in some ways even within the scope
of your AR own argument is an illusion
like if it turns out that the stability
of the West is predicated on the
sanctity of marriage and the stability
of the family then what that genuinely
means is that there is nothing more
important than you can do that you can
do despite surface appearances than to
be faithful to your wife and to rais
your family properly and that
any Temptation you have on ideological
grounds to downplay the significance of
that you know what's one family in a in
a sea of two billion families that's the
quick nihilistic response that's all
delusion and that you may that
the idea that what you're doing is
pointless because it's just you against
the mass let's say that's also that's
the voice of the Devil Himself so to
speak proclaiming the nihilistic you you
uselessness of your mortal life it could
easily be and I I do believe this I've
believed this for many decades is that
there is literally nothing more
important or effective than you can do
then to get your moral house in order
and then to build those subsidiary
organizations around yourself that are
predicated on that Foundation that all
other Pathways forward in the absence of
that lead
nowhere yeah and I mean I think that
that's exactly right the the I think one
of the predicates to conservatism or
frankly to to just you know basic human
responsibility is the acknowledgement
that it's very anything that's worth
building has to be built from the ground
up and if you try to impose it from the
top down it it not only tends to fail it
tends to fragment everything that if you
one one of the things that you see in
the temptation of politics I think one
of the reasons why interviews with
politicians don't work anymore uh is
because the temptation of politics is
fundamentally a lie and people
understand it which is okay if you put a
bunch of weight at the top of the system
but there's nothing at the bottom of
that pyramid all the all these societal
substructures have been destroyed it's
just going to collapse and we keep
arguing over who should put the pressure
at the top of the system but any
pressure at the top of the system is
just going to is just going
to essentially create larger cracks in
the foundation the we have to rebuild
and and and the rebuilding process is so
long and so hard and as you say it's
easy to fall pre to nihilism in that but
the reality is that societies are filled
with people over time Society is filled
with graveyards filled with people whose
names you don't know and you'll never
know right we know a few names from any
generation one of the intimidating
things about being you know in the
public eye is that we all tend to think
of ourselves as quote unquote having a
legacy how many names do you know from
1810 right I mean like anyone even the
most knowledgeable people how many names
do you know a couple hundred names from
1810 how many people were alive in 1810
a lot hundreds of millions of people
were alive in 1810 right I mean the the
reality is that the vast majority of
human beings over the course of time
won't have a quote unquote Legacy except
for the part that they played in the
building of the social fabric that is
going to be past down generation to
generation and which we just accept with
literally our mother's milk as we're
born into that Society so you can either
be a part of that social Fabric or it
cannot be a part of that social Fabric
and hand something down that's good to
your kids or hand something that's
that's worthless down to your children
and and so again I think that the
fundamental battle and you're you're
seeing it it's it's it's true in every
area of life and it's it's frustrating
to have to fight these battles because
again I feel like I grew up in an arena
I think we all feel like this actually
if you're above a certain age meaning
like if you're above 30 right I'm not
I'm not all that old I'm turning 40
right now know like if you're above a
certain age you remember when basic
truths were just taken for granted it is
good to have a mother and a father in
the home it is a positive good to have
children we it's not a matter of apathy
as to whether people have kids people
should have kids it is good to have kids
it is good to have multiple kids right
these were all things that everybody
when I was growing up used to it is good
to see people as individual human beings
and not as members of races these were
all things that we took for Grant and
now we're having to reargue First
principles and that that's and and I
think that one of the things that that
I've found and that's that's frustrating
to me on a personal level because again
I spend my life arguing these principles
on on a day-to-day basis is that in
reality some of those arguments are
going to be won and some of those
arguments are are going to be lost but
the real effect that I'm going to have
on the world is what my four kids end up
doing right that that's actually what
the real effect that that I'm going to
have on on society that's true for
nearly everyone on planet Earth you know
I may be able to have like a slightly
outsized effect in just the fact that I
can convince some people that they
should do the things that I think are
are worthwhile in life get married have
kids maybe there'll be a few thousand
people over the course of my career who
who do better things with their life
because they listen to my show but in
reality like the most longlasting thing
that you can do is not the rational it's
actually the it's it's the things that
we do and we don't know why now one one
of the things that that I think you know
the rationalists have have gotten
totally wrong and there's a lot of good
psychological and and biological
evidence that you know way better than I
do is that we tend to come up with
rationalizations post Haw right that
there's plenty of evidence to this
effect that that if you literally if if
you literally you know are are the the
study that I'm thinking of is one where
effectively speaking you are prodded to
to move your your limbs in a particular
way and then you are asked about why you
moved your par your limbs in that and
you will make up an excuse you will
actually try to justify why this thing
happened and you weren't just like
physically you know forced to do the
thing that is the the reality of human
life is that most of the things that we
do are not driven by us rationalizing
the things that we do we're we're R
we're rationalizing activities that have
been promulgated and made second nature
to us and sometimes first nature to us
over time and you wreck those fences you
wreck that whole system at your own
Peril and that's what we have done and
so rebuilding that is not a matter of of
a of a day it's not a matter of a week
or a month or a year it's a matter of
centuries when when when you shatter a
stained glass window it took you a
moment to shatter the stained glass
window it may take years to rebuild that
that stained glass window and that
that's the part that's intimidating and
very difficult and the way the stain
glass window is actually rebuilt is not
even by drawing the schematic of the
stained glass window which is I think
something you and I both try to do daily
somebody's actually going to have to
like go out find the sand make the glass
color the glass create like all of those
structures and that that's the hard part
yep well that's a good place to end Ben
and it's a good time to end um most of
you watching will know that I'll follow
this with another half an hour on the
daily wi side and I'm going to walk Ben
through some autobiographical material
which I'm looking forward to and so
yeah well thank you for talking to me
today and for helping me explore these
ideas a bit further um we're going to do
a gospel seminar you and I have
discussed this and your possible
participation in that just for everybody
watching and listening who knows about
the Exodus seminar we're going to do the
same thing with the gospels at the first
week of April with many of the same um
many of the usual criminals you might
say and so you might I hope some of you
are interested in that I'm certainly
interested in that it's going going to
be very um I learned a tremendous amount
in that Exodus seminar and I'm hoping to
that the same thing will happen when we
reconvene um and I'm very happy happy
with the daily wire for facilitating
that and also for all the success we had
with the Exodus seminar which that
that's gone extraordinarily well and uh
and I think it speaks that fact which is
a very unlikely fact that that did
happen that it went well and that it was
popularly received also speaks to
exactly what we were discussing today
which is this widespread cultural hunger
for a proper discussion of really the
sacred what's under what's even
underneath first principles and so it's
very uh useful to be engaged in yet
another conversation that pushes that
along so anyways we'll turn over to the
Daily wire plus side for everyone who's
watching and listening you could join us
there and to you Ben thank you for
talking to me today and to everybody
here in Toronto for making this possible
and the film crew there all right Ben
good talking to you thanks so
[Music]
much